# Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Clinician-Educator Track 
Committee members: Brian R. Smith (Chair), Richard Belitsky, Richard Bribiescas, Alan Dardik, Kimberly Davis, Gary Desir (subcommittee), Susan Kashaf, Mary O'Connor, Ismene Petrakis, Marie Robert, Karen Santucci, Peter Schulam, Lynn Tanoue, Federico Vaca, Lawrence Young Ex Officio members: Robert Alpern, Linda Bockenstedt, Carolyn Slayman, Stephanie Spangler
## Table of Contents
Introduction ..... 2
Executive Summary of Recommendations ..... 3
Findings of the Committee ..... 6
Recommendations of the Committee ..... 20
Appendix 1: Original 1996 Proposal that established the CE Track ..... 23
Appendix 2: Data on CE Track faculty growth and demographics ..... 32
Appendix 3: Report of the 2012 Ad Hoc Committee for the Evaluation of the CE Tracks ..... 37
Appendix 4: New guidelines on types and metrics of scholarship in the CE track ..... 43
Appendix 5: Recommended changes in CV Supplement and Referee Template Letters ..... 49
Appendix 6: Recommendations regarding procedures for central A\&P Committees ..... 63
---
The Clinician-Educator faculty track was created in 1996, in response to "convulsive changes in the health care system" that made it critical to respond to (a) the need for a broader geographic and disciplinary reach of the medical school's clinical practice and teaching venues and (b) the increasing complexity of both biomedical research and clinical practice that led to a need for individual faculty to better concentrate on fewer than all three of the School's missions (clinical care, teaching, research), albeit maintaining some degree of activity in all these areas (See Appendix 1). The original proposal for the creation of the CE Track stated the issue succinctly: "To achieve the expected level of excellence in clinical care and teaching consistent with the traditions of the School of Medicine, it is essential that faculty who are exemplary providers of care and dedicated educators be attracted, retained and appropriately recognized."
Over the succeeding 20 years, the number of CE faculty has grown faster and to a far greater extent than faculty in the other tracks and now represent the largest faculty subgroup (See Appendix 2). The presence of CE faculty has contributed greatly to the School's prominence. CE faculty are critical lynchpins in the School's tripartite mission, contributing as outstanding clinicians and educators, innovators developing new clinical and educational programs, and scholars making important contributions to progress in the field. As the CE Faculty numbers have grown and as the nature of clinical practice has continued to undergo "convulsive changes", there has been widespread concern expressed by faculty and by the medical school leadership that the processes and procedures of re-appointment and promotion in this track, along with the stated and unstated criteria for promotion, have not kept pace with the rapid evolution of how scholarship with a CE emphasis is performed, and how local, regional, and national/international impact of CE faculty should be measured. This is believed to have adversely impacted not only appropriate recognition of the contributions of these faculty but also potentially the outcome of promotion consideration at both the departmental and institutional levels. These issues are not unique to Yale, but have been recognized at virtually all researchintensive medical schools with an associated large academic medical center.
In order to address these issues, a Committee was formed in 2012 which made significant progress toward addressing some of the concerns through enhancement of documentation and clarification of many policies and procedures (See Appendix 3). Nevertheless, with the further evolution of clinical practice at Yale to include the "Clinician" designation, the further expansion of the Yale New Haven Health System, and the increasingly complex and expansive footprint of the faculty practice (Yale Medicine) requiring increasing dedication to innovative quality and care delivery models, it is timely to again question what additional recommendations may be appropriate to "attract, retain, and appropriately recognize" CE faculty.
In addition to an Executive Summary of the final recommendations, this report is divided into two major sections: Findings and Recommendations. The former summarizes the overall consensus of the committee on the current state of the CE track and on principles to be followed. The latter identifies specific recommendations based on the Findings. Following these sections are six appendices that both provide background documentation and delineate the many specifics of the recommendations.
---
# Executive Summary of the Recommendations of the Committee: 
1. The criteria for promotion in the CE Track should remain the same and parallel the level of accomplishment expected for all of the current full-time ladder tracks. Specifically:
2. The breadth of CE Track scholarship should be better defined so as to be inclusive of the many ways in which these faculty advance the practice of Medicine.
3. Faculty hired with the anticipation of being on the CE Track must have a rigorous CEappropriate mentoring plan in place.
4. The School should convene a working group to determine what infrastructure support should be provided for CE track faculty
5. Revisions to the Appointments \& Promotions process should be adopted.
---
departments for such letters to come from the same department but different sections).
6. Current policies regarding anticipated track switches at the level of Assistant Professor and track switches at the Associate Professor level should remain the same.
7. Track changes at the level of Full Professor between CE and CS should be permitted, but should be extremely rare and based on relatively infrequent institutional events.
8. The School should explore creative options to allow full, or possibly partial, triennial or sabbatical leaves that might be more compatible with the work-style of CE Track faculty and should disseminate clear guidelines regarding other benefits, including those available to "conterminous" appointees.
9. Departments and the School should continuously monitor the blend of CE Track faculty, Clinicians, and CS and TT Track faculty appropriate to fulfilling the tripartite mission of the Departments and the School and should assure that newly hired faculty understand the differences between tracks.
---
10. The School should give careful consideration to the elimination of the "Clinician" employment category and to the creation instead of a new full-time ladder Clinical ("C") track that would have different verbiage for the titles of the three ranks to reflect the concept that scholarship would not be part of the criteria for advancement on this new track. The Committee does not recommend or endorse creation of such a new track per se but does recommend that the School establish an appropriate process to further evaluate whether such a Track should be created.
11. The School, in the context of deliberating Recommendation 10, should also consider whether there should be term limits for the CE track at the level of the Assistant Professor, similar to other tracks that require scholarship for advancement. The Committee does not recommend or endorse introduction of term limits at the Assistant Professor level but does recommend that the School establish an appropriate process to further evaluate whether such a change should be undertaken.
12. School administration, in conjunction with the Provost's Office, should review and modify the verbiage in the Faculty Handbook to align the language with the findings and recommendations adopted from this report. Changing language in the Faculty Handbook could potentially affect other members of the University outside of YSM. For this reason, the Committee itself does not suggest the particular changes to be made.
---
# Findings of the Committee: 
1. The CE Track encompasses the entire tripartite mission; the track requires similar "impact" for promotion as the other full-time ladder tracks. The Committee re-examined the definition of the Clinician-Educator (CE) Track and the criteria for promotion of faculty in that track, as currently articulated in the Faculty Handbook. The Committee noted that, throughout its history, Appointments \& Promotions Committees at both the Department and the School level, and indeed the CE Faculty themselves, have uniformly seen the CE Track as inclusive of all three missions of the Medical School: clinical care ("C"), education ("E"), and scholarly work ("S"). Thus, the designation of the track as "CE" is not intended to eliminate "S" from its intrinsic nature, any more than the designation of the Clinician-Scholar Track as "CS" is intended to eliminate the "E" mission from its intrinsic nature. Both Tracks demand the inclusion of all three roles, albeit the emphasis on the three missions is different between them. The Committee therefore re-examined the nature of scholarship in the CE Track and what degree of impact CE Faculty scholarship should be expected to have at the higher ranks.
According to the Faculty Handbook, CE Associate Professor faculty "are expected to influence the teaching or practice of medicine in a significant way and should participate in research and scholarly activities." This phraseology is ambiguous as it does not designate the extent (local, regional, or national/international), to which faculty are expected to influence the "teaching or practice of medicine". If taken in parallel with descriptions of the other tracks, the implication is that such individuals have an "emerging national influence or impact on the teaching or practice of medicine" along with a current "regional" reputation that extends beyond the immediate footprint of the medical center. The Committee felt that it was indeed appropriate for CE Track faculty at the level of Associate Professor to be held to a standard of extending this "influence" on teaching and practice (alternatively described as "impact") beyond just the local environment.
At the level of Professor, the Faculty Handbook is clearer: "Candidates for appointment or promotion to the rank of Professor in the Clinician-Educator Track must be national or international leaders in their fields, as evidenced by scholarship that has had a national impact on clinical medicine, public health, or education, as well as by sustained excellence in patient care and teaching." [emphasis added]. The Committee noted the emphasis first on scholarship and embraced this definition.
In summary, the Committee was in consensus that elevation to Professor in any of the tracks, prominently including the CE Track, must remain contingent upon national (+/-international) recognition of the individual's scholarship that has had significant impact on the field. Similarly, the Committee is in agreement that elevation to Associate Professor requires an emerging national recognition of the candidate as well as a firm regional recognition of that impact. How such accomplishments are defined, measured, and documented will differ among tracks, but the underlying nature of total accomplishments for the three tracks (CE, CS, and traditional track [TT]) should be at the same "level". The Committee has re-affirmed this stance in the Recommendations below.
2. The great breadth of scholarship in the CE Track should be defined and recognized so that the nature of CE Track Scholarship can be communicated to all members of the School and to Promotion Referees outside Yale. Given the assertions in Finding 1 above, the important questions remaining are how such extended impact is measured
---
and how "impact" relates to "scholarship". Historically, Departments and the YSM Appointment \& Promotions committees have emphasized traditional journal-based publications of high impact and de-emphasized other types and metrics of impactful scholarship that are especially relevant in the CE Track. The Committee reviewed documents from several other research-intensive medical schools and noted that a broad definition of clinical and educational "scholarship can best define metrics of impact (and simultaneously of accomplishments in scholarship) that go beyond just traditional journal-based publications. The Committee felt that the more detailed articulation of the nature of "impact" and of "scholarship" in the clinical and educational arenas, and how such "non-traditional" scholarship is assessed and recognized, is the critical area that would better align the CE Track job description with CE Track promotion. More importantly, this "re-definition" of parameters of impact and of scholarship would better reflect what is so critical to the School and indeed to the discipline of "Medicine" about these faculty. Such "re-definition" (really a clarification) would extend the work of the 2012 committee and would bring Yale in closer alignment with the promotion practices of its peer institutions. Finally, appropriate definition of impact and scholarship would recognize that there is not a quantum difference between the requirements for Associate Professor versus Professor (the latter with a need for scholarship and the former "participation" in scholarly activities) but rather a difference of degree.
The Committee recognized that departments, faculty, and A\&P Committees should have better guidance on what constitutes impactful scholarship in the CE Track. Examples of items that should be included are: national guideline development; novel programmatic development that is disseminated nationally; quality improvement programs that become national models; procedural and cognitive clinical mentorship carried out on a national level and on a local level when that local activity results in the production of the next generation of high-impact physicians and physician scholars; national positions of educational and/or clinical leadership ("thought leadership"); innovative educational programs utilizing novel approaches that become national models; advances in the "non-biomedical" areas of clinical practice (e.g., disclosure training, medical liability, disaster preparedness and other population-based health efforts, conflict resolution and other aspects of the "business" of medicine, interpersonal interaction enhancements and other critical areas of holistic health care that often reflect scholarship more frequently thought of as those of the social sciences and the humanities); and intellectual property development that advances the field. The Committee devoted significant effort to better delineating the CE Track definition of scholarship and to articulating the metrics of such impact (see Recommendations).
The Committee also recognized the importance of providing promotion referees, especially those from outside of Yale, with appropriate guidance as to the meaning of scholarship in the CE Track.
The Committee recognized that the approach to metrics of CE impact and scholarship may vary among Departments, usually based on the differences among the subdisciplines of Medicine. However, while it is always appropriate for an individual Department to have a higher "quantitative threshold" or "stringency" for promotion of its faculty compared to a "minimum central School requirement", a department should not have a qualitatively different set of requirements, for example, a set of requirements that might be appropriate for another track (e.g. CS) but not appropriate for the CE Track. Requirements for the other tracks do not recognize the breadth, and indeed the sometimes very different parameters and venues, by which impactful scholarship is measured in the CE Track.
The Committee therefore recommended review of a variety of current policies and procedures, including revising the current CV Supplement template to embrace and make explicit a more
---
extensive set of overall guidelines (outside of the Faculty Handbook itself). Specifically, the Committee recommended that provision of examples of CE Track scholarship and the metrics/methods that can be used to assess clinical and educational quality (not just productivity), impact, and scholarship, and revising the referee letter templates. In this regard, faculty and departments do not currently spend sufficient effort honing the well-constructed CV Supplement document but instead often regard it as an afterthought or an "add-on" to the CV. This likely results from the history and the perception, whether real or not, that departmental and central A\&P committees only assess the aspects of impact and scholarship that are part of the standard Yale CV. Faculty, departments, and A\&P committees should therefore be educated in the importance of "alternate indices" of scholarly impact and faculty quality.
In summary, the Committee was in consensus that it is necessary to re-establish and clarify the breadth of scholarship activity and of metrics of scholarship dissemination critical to the recognition of CE Track faculty accomplishments. The Committee endorsed not only further defining the breadth of scholarship but also disseminating that knowledge to Yale faculty, departments, chairs, and A\&P Committees as well as to nonYale promotion referees. Dissemination of this breadth of scholarship must be accompanied by policies and procedures that help guide the faculty and their evaluators to emphasize these areas appropriately. The Committee provided specific Recommendations to accomplish these goals.
3. CE Track faculty should have a mentoring plan specifically designed for this track. The Committee noted that there is "tension" in the CE Track between job responsibilities and activities that facilitate academic promotion compared to the other academic tracks. In the traditional track (and to a somewhat lesser extent in the Clinician-Scholar track), job responsibilities are almost uniformly coordinated with criteria for promotion. By contrast, this is not generally true for the CE Track. The component of the job description that involves local clinical care and education as opposed to higher impact, regionally and nationally oriented, clinical and educational program development and other scholarly work in the CE Track is substantial, often $\geq 50 \%$ of the job description. This leads to some frustration on the part of the CE faculty as they contribute in multiple ways to the missions of the School but must do so with the recognition that part of their job description is less relevant to promotion.
This situation demands a mentoring and evaluation system for CE faculty that is geared to their particular needs and that constantly reviews their performance in a mutually informative way. Review should not just be with respect to clinical productivity, but also in terms of their progress toward promotion, including their clinical/educational/scholarly impact and recognition, regionally and ultimately nationally/internationally. The added stress of having significant portions of one's job description being somewhat tangential to the requirements for promotion as well as the qualitatively different nature of scholarship and impact in the CE Track make the nature of mentoring for faculty in this track different from the mentoring of CS and TT faculty. The Committee therefore believes that a careful assessment of the mentoring infrastructure for CE Track faculty would be of great value. The Committee believes that mentoring should be carried out at least annually and include a careful review of an updated CV Supplement as well as the CV of the faculty member to provide advice as to how well the faculty member is meeting criteria for promotion. Assembly of a list of potential referees for potential promotion may be an excellent approach to focusing junior faculty on how impact will be considered. This may be supplemented by reviewing the referee template letters that would go out for promotion with the faculty mentee so as to further enhance understanding of promotion criteria.
---
Departments may require assistance from central resources to establish a more optimal CE Track mentoring culture, that is, better resources for both establishing "best practices" in mentoring and for "mentoring the mentors". Reviewing the overall progression of faculty in all tracks on a yearly "department review" basis would be helpful to create a common culture of respect for, and regular assessment of success with, CE faculty. Some faculty reflect a concern that CE Track faculty may not get the same overall academic "attention" as those in other tracks and believe that more regular and appropriate mentoring would help to raise the academic visibility of CE faculty. Faculty recognize that variability in mentoring exists across departments.
In summary, the Committee recognized an important need for improved mentoring for CE Track faculty that reflects the differences in CE faculty promotion considerations. The Committee includes further Recommendations in this area in the appropriate section of this report.
4. The current infrastructure available at the School for the needs of CE Track faculty should be evaluated. The School commits significant resources to creation of an exceptional overall environment for the success of its TT and CS faculty (state-of-the-art bench science cores, supported educational programs, various informatics and bench research tools that are made available in start-up packages, and so forth). Without attempting to dictate or define the creation and maintenance of similar support systems for CE Track faculty, the Committee believes that a new assessment of both the need for, and the current status of, CE Track "core" resources within the School would be an especially valuable contribution to the success of CE faculty and should be pursued by an additional working group or process in the near future. This working group should recommend changes and additions to infrastructure, including infrastructure that streamlines clinical activities and makes them "friendly" toward concomitant scholarship, as well as potential additions to common core-type facilities for CE track type scholarship.
In summary, the Committee noted the need for an assessment of the infrastructure resources needed for the success of CE track faculty scholarship. A Recommendation for the formation of a working group or process to accomplish this goal is included.
5. Procedural changes to the promotion process itself that would further benefit CE Track faculty should be considered. The Committee believes that, given the differences in how impact is assessed for CE Track faculty, modifications to the current promotion processes should be made. For example, evaluation of clinical and educational prominence and impact cannot be accomplished solely through a review of the CV and CV supplement, but instead should include critical evaluation by individuals who have observed and/or worked with the candidate in the clinical and/or educational setting. The Committee, therefore, believes that clarifications regarding the definition of both arm's length and non-arm's length letters should be made. Similarly, for very large Departments (for example, Internal Medicine) appropriate evaluation of the clinical contributions of CE Track faculty might be better served by allowing inclusion of internal referee evaluations from other more senior faculty in the same Department but in different Sections of the Department as relevant interactions are more likely to take place among these faculty. The policy where all faculty in the same department are excluded from
---
providing internal referee letters should be revised given the size of certain departments. In addition, as noted earlier, the Committee believes the template letters that are sent to reappointment and promotion "referees" should be revised, in particular, arm's length referees outside of Yale, so that these referees better understand the nature of the CE track and the kinds of impact and scholarship that are expected of individuals in this track.
The Committee, and the designated subcommittee in this area, noted several additional concerns of Chairs and Section Chiefs in terms of the overall central A\&P process. These concerns include: (a) the perception that, since the Committee is composed of very busy senior faculty who cannot easily attend all meetings, the committee composition at any single meeting may vary in terms of experience and expertise relevant to a particular candidate and that it is therefore currently difficult to match the committee ideally to the candidate; (b) since the presenting Chair/Chief does not get any pre-presentation feedback on what issues the Committee may have with a particular candidate, the Chair/Chief may not always be fully prepared to address issues that are raised; (c) the current collation of materials supporting excellence in education is not uniform by departments and this diversity may make it difficult for the A\&P committee to evaluate such contributions; (d) as noted above, more guidance on potential metrics for evaluation of the impact of scholarship and the diversity of scholarship in the CE Track would be welcomed.
In summary, the Committee notes a need for policy and procedural changes in the promotion process to optimize the approach to evaluating CE scholarship (for example, clarifying the definition of arm's length referees and the appropriateness of different categories of potential internal referees). The Committee also notes other internal process changes that might benefit all faculty tracks when being considered by the central A\&P Committees. These are reflected in the Recommendations.
6. The distinction of CE and CS Tracks is reaffirmed and neither should be a "backup" for the other. The Committee notes that concern exists that some Departments have blurred the lines between CS Track faculty and CE Track faculty. The materials and guidelines produced by the 2012 Committee re-emphasized the differences in these tracks and the current Committee re-affirms those guidelines. Similarly, the Committee re-affirms the current procedure that allows for transfer from one track to another at the Associate Professor level and for change in track goal at the Assistant Professor level, which is encouraged when the career path for an individual evolves in a different direction from the original plan. The Committee reaffirms that neither track should ever be considered a "backup" for the other track. The types of scholarship pursued on the CE and CS tracks are generally different both qualitatively and quantitatively. The stringency by which impact is judged for each of the three missions also differs between the tracks (that is, one track has a higher stringency for "C" and "E" while the other higher stringency for "S") and an individual switching tracks should have a portfolio that best fits the track that s/he switches to. Finally, there will always be individuals whose broad (and deep) accomplishments could justify advancement on two or three of the available ladder tracks (CE, CS, TT). It is important that such accomplished individuals are not allowed to "fall between the tracks" but rather that the most appropriate track is chosen and the individual evaluated for the totality of her/his contribution to the field and to the School.
In summary, the Committee reaffirms the distinction articulated in prior reports and in the Faculty Handbook between CE and CS Track faculty. The Committee also reaffirms the current policies regarding track switches at the level of Assistant and Associate
---
Professor and also emphasizes that the CE Track is never a "fall-back" track for CS Track faculty.
7. While requests for track change at the level of Full Professor should be extremely rare, the Committee endorses development of an appropriate process. Currently it is possible to change between the full time faculty tracks at the level of Assistant or Associate Professor as long as there are at least two years remaining in the current term appointment. It is also possible to change from a full-time faculty track position to a non-ladder track position (research track or clinician) at any time, including at the completion of a term appointment in the full time tracks. However, it is not currently possible to transfer tracks once an individual reaches the level of a tenured or a continuing appointment position, that is, tenured associate or full professor on the traditional track or full professor on either the CS or the CE track or the Investigator Track. The Committee noted that the history of the evolution of tracks at Yale (and consequent changes in the Faculty Handbook) has led to the possibility that a professor-level appointment could be in an "inappropriate" track based on the most current procedures, that is, an appointment could have been made before the existence of certain tracks. Furthermore, the Committee noted that the evolution of the definition of tracks over time has also led to the potential for departmental misunderstanding and utilization of the tracks (especially the CS and CE tracks). Hence there has been the potential for promotion of faculty on a track that other Departments might have found inappropriate and that an independent review might now also deem "inappropriate". Finally, over time the emergence of new medical disciplines has resulted in the addition of whole new Departments. These new Departments, with a deeper understanding of the differences in scholarship type within their own discipline, might have chosen to promote an individual to Professor on a different track than the "old" Department chose.
This set of historical circumstances has the most pragmatic consequences if a faculty member was promoted on the CE Track but may have been more appropriately promoted on the CS track, since the different tracks reflect potential "commitment" differences on the part of the University. Individuals on the CE Track can lose their continuing appointment on an individual performance basis, whereas individuals on the CS track can only lose their continuing appointment if all members of that group lose their appointment. Based on these considerations, although the track of an individual faculty member is not "visible" in any way, the Committee nevertheless concluded that it would be appropriate to allow track transfer between the CS and CE tracks at the level of Full Professor. Such a track transfer request should be based on a substantive institutional event occurring after the appointment to full professor, for example, substantive changes in the Faculty Handbook regarding the tracks, creation of new tracks, or creation of a new Department. Such track change requests at the Full Professor level should not be based solely on career-direction evolution that might occur after the Professorial appointment, nor should they be based on other more minor retrospective concerns that instead should have been raised at the time of the initial appointment. The Committee expects that such track-change requests would be very rare, but believes that such changes should be permitted if justified by specific, well-delimited, substantive changes in faculty structure such as those alluded to above. The Committee does not ascribe to any particular process by which such changes should be considered but instead defers to the administration to establish such processes.
In summary, the Committee believes that, while a compelling rationale for a Track switch at the level of Full Professor is extremely rare, there may be specific and special
---
circumstances, articulated above, that justify such a switch. The Committee does not recommend any particular procedure for dealing with these rare events but instead defers to the leadership for further definition of policy/procedure.
8. The Committee supports better dissemination of information regarding faculty benefits and consideration of alternatives to sabbatical/triennial leaves for CE Track faculty. The Committee notes that the allowance of triennial or sabbatical leave for CE faculty varies widely among Departments. It is recognized that clinical practice is difficult to reconcile with a four, six, or twelve month leave. However, it is generally possible to carve out time for a 4-6 week period. Such leave could be a valuable adjunct for career development. Examples might include: learning a new procedure from a master clinician at another institution that can then be incorporated into both practice and scholarship at Yale; taking one's clinical skills to another part of the world to explore impactful ways to positively change our approach to global health; or work with a mentor on educational or clinical approaches used by other institutions, domestic or international. The Committee believes that it is important for Departments to explore such opportunities for CE Track faculty as part of their career development and that School policies on leaves should be compatible with such approaches. The Committee notes that this in no way alters the fact that sabbatical/triennial leaves across the School remain a privilege and not a right and must always be approved by the School to assure that it will not interfere with any of the School's three missions.
The Committee also noted that other employment benefits are not clearly understood by faculty and staff, in particular the rules governing the faculty tuition benefit and Yale University benefits for faculty who hold coterminous positions with other institutions, e.g. the VA or YNHH. The Committee does not recommend consideration of any changes in the current scheme, but does note that there may be opportunity for better education of faculty and staff in these areas.
In summary, the Committee supports the privilege of leave (triennial or sabbatical) for CE Track faculty and suggests exploration of creative approaches that might better fit CE Track faculty. The Committee also noted that there has been some confusion articulated by faculty regarding other benefits, especially in the coterminous situation, and simply notes that there is opportunity for better education.
9. The Committee recognizes the critical importance of defining the CE Track faculty member's anticipated portfolio of activities at the time of hire and endorses designation of an "anticipated" track for faculty at the time of hire in order to promote this goal, without compromising the flexibility that faculty now have in altering their track "goal" during the first 1-2 Assistant Professor terms. The Committee noted that since the original creation of the CE Track in 1996 and even since the most recent Track review in 2012, there has been a further major evolution of the clinical practice of the School of Medicine. As the Yale New Haven Health System has grown and as Medicine as a whole moves toward a Population Health and outcomes based reimbursement system and structure, the practice (Yale Medicine) has needed to respond by increasing both the depth and breadth of the clinically-oriented faculty. While in the past it was possible to meet the clinical service needs of the patients cared for by Yale Medicine with a smaller coterie of Clinician-Educator (CE) track faculty working in tandem with community physicians, the newly evolving health care system now demands that
---
Yale Medicine directly employ a larger and more diverse contingent of physicians. This need has been met in part by the creation of the "Clinician" non-ladder faculty employment category. Nevertheless, the Committee notes that the current placement of physicians into the "Clinician" versus "CE Track" pathways is not uniformly considered with sufficient care and foresight. Because of both the relatively recent creation of the Clinician option and because of longstanding culture within Departments, the Committee believes that some physicians may be in the "wrong" pathway (Clinician vs CE Faculty) and that even new hires may continue to be recruited into an inappropriate position. Moreover, there remains concern that some CE Faculty may still be recruited as if their role in the medical school was similar to that of the currently nonladder "Clinician" recruits. Because of concerns over this confusion, which obviously directly impacts CE Track faculty, the Committee felt that it needed to extend its original charge to consider some of the issues involved in the relationship of the Clinician category with CE Track faculty and to preliminary address related concerns regarding the current structure of the nonladder Clinician category.
First, because of these important historical and contemporary issues, the Committee believes that there is a pressing need to assure that job responsibilities of all clinically-oriented ladder track faculty, especially CE track faculty, (a) are clearly defined at the time of hire and as the faculty member progresses over time; and (b) are compatible with the requirements for reappointment and promotion on the ladder track. The plan for a CE Faculty recruit should have a similar underlying philosophy to that of a CS (Clinician Scholar) or TT (traditional track) recruit, that is, that the goal is for this individual to "climb the ladder" to eventual full professor status. While some recruits may not attain that goal over time, just as happens in all the ladder tracks, the Department, School, University, and faculty member should be committed to this vision.
The "job description" for a new CE Track faculty member should therefore explicitly recognize the component of scholarship intrinsic to this career pathway. Because of the great variability among departments and among the various roles that CE Track faculty have, the Committee did not believe that it could, or should, proscribe any particular resources, commitments, or other aids to the attainment of appropriate scholarship, but rather agreed that all of these considerations are in the purview of the Departments. The Committee did, however, believe that it is important to specifically reference the scholarly component of the position in an offer letter. The School and the Departments should not lose sight of this important distinguishing characteristic of the CE Track versus the "Clinician" designation. The Committee also believed that departments should also recognize that the difference between these two career paths is not based on geography. As the clinical practice grows, there is a need for Clinicians in New Haven as well as at more distant sites of practice. Similarly, it is possible that a CE Track faculty member may be appropriate for primary geographic placement at a practice based at a more distant site, especially if that distant site provides resources for the scholarly and educational work of that faculty member.
Second, the Committee supported the important flexibility inherent in formally considering first term Assistant Professors as "undifferentiated" with respect to track designation. (Most frequently, Assistant Professors also remain "undifferentiated" in their second term, although it is permissible to declare oneself as CE Track for the second term). However, although the Committee recognized that in the early part of their careers faculty are often fluid in their career aspirations and one does not wish to limit that in too severe a fashion, the Committee also believes that there are important downsides to this approach. Although many faculty may remain fluid, the majority ultimately remain true to their original intent (CE, CS, TT) and offers are virtually always made on the basis of the anticipated eventual track. Indeed, it is hard to imagine an offer for an "intended" TT or CS that would not be explicitly crafted in light of that career intention. When the "most likely" or "intended" track is not specifically mutually agreed
---
upon by the department and the new faculty member, it is difficult (likely impossible) to craft appropriate mentorship (see finding \#3 above). Moreover, if the "intended" track is not communicated to the School, it becomes difficult for the School to provide appropriate oversight with respect to optimizing faculty distribution, planning for future and current needs, assuring proper mentorship, and the like.
The Committee therefore believes that the "intended" or "most likely" or "anticipated" track for a newly hired faculty member should be clearly delineated at the time of hire and shared with the School as well as with the faculty member. This would apply to all tracks, not just CE.
In summary, the Committee emphasizes that it is critical to assure that job responsibilities of all clinically-oriented ladder track faculty, especially CE track faculty, (a) are clearly defined at the time of hire and as the faculty member progresses over time; and (b) are compatible with the requirements for re-appointment and promotion on the ladder track. The job description should explicitly recognize the component of scholarship that is intrinsic to this track. The Committee notes that CE Track faculty need not be geographically limited to the main campuses but could be appropriately located in more distant sites if those sites are conducive to the scholarly work of that particular faculty member. Furthermore, in order to assure optimum mentoring to the individual faculty members and to allow for monitoring of the growth of the School's faculty, the Committee advocates that departments and faculty designate an "anticipated" or "most likely" track at the time of hire and that this is communicated to the School and faculty at the time of hire. This should apply to all the tracks. The Committee does not mean to limit the fluidity of a faculty member's early career by this recommendation, that is, the committee expects that faculty, in consultation with their department, will be able to alter their "anticipated" track during this early part of their career without significant administrative burden.
10. The Committee believes that the School should undertake a process to comprehensively consider the replacement of the Clinician employment category with a "Clinical" ladder track faculty pathway. However, the Committee does not make its own recommendation as to the outcome of such a consideration process. As noted above, the Committee felt that it was important to extend its discussions to the "Clinician" employment category, since its recent development has blurred the distinction between the Clinician rank and the CE pathway. Moreover, there has been concern that, while the Clinician pathway may work well for situations where long-standing community practices are rapidly incorporated into Yale Medicine, an increasingly common situation is one where there is a need to hire individual superb clinicians, often directly out of training, into roles in the faculty practice that are expected to include almost exclusive clinical activity with a modicum of "role model" type teaching, but with no necessity or desire for a scholarship component. For these circumstances, concern has been expressed that for the individuals being hired, a designation of "Clinician" as a non-ladder "employment category" may be viewed unenthusiastically by the potential candidates and hence reduce Yale's competitiveness in the marketplace. In addition, some "Clinicians", in part as a response to this latter concern and in part to assure that they engage in some teaching, are given a "voluntary track" appointment (e.g., "Assistant Clinical Professor"). This creates at best a misnomer since a "voluntary" track appointment is then held by a full-time employee of Yale. This use of an identical title for full time members of Yale Medicine may also result in significant confusion among patients as to how they are receiving their care.
---
Finally, and perhaps most importantly for this Committee, the current CE Track includes a significant number of faculty who were hired at a time when there was no "Clinician" option and were brought on board with the notion that they would almost certainly never progress beyond the first rung of the ladder, that is, Assistant Professor. Indeed, as noted in Appendix 1, this was foreseen as a likely outcome for many CE faculty when the track was first devised: "It is anticipated that many faculty in this track will continue their activities at the Assistant Professor level for prolonged periods because of the unique aspects of some practice settings (off-site or primary care, for example), but remain an integral component of the faculty as long as they maintain high quality clinical teaching activities". However, over time the concept that faculty in the CE Track should be "frozen" at the Assistant Professor level has not been embraced.
Indeed, the Committee recognized that some current CE-appointed full-time faculty are master clinicians and solid "role model" teachers but do not want to conduct scholarship at a level that will lead to promotion on the CE-track, even with a broadening of the concept of scholarship/impact that this Committee has helped to craft. On the basis of their clinical work and reputation in the clinical sphere, they would easily meet the "C" criteria for Associate or even Full Professor but they would not meet the scholarship criteria (and, most importantly, do not desire to meet the scholarship criteria). They do not participate in scholarship, not because they are "lesser" clinicians and educators, but because their devotion is totally to clinical medicine practiced extraordinarily well at the state-of-the-art level and passing this on to the next generation. They are solid teachers of their craft and practice, but predominantly for residents/fellows and other post-training physicians, and they do not innovate education nor do they necessarily "profess" at the level of Associate or Full Professor. These are lynchpin, even "highlight", faculty for the reputation and function of the Yale Medicine clinical practice; they may attract not only patients to the practice but they also may attract trainees at all levels because of their superb "master clinician" reputation-- they are quintessential "role models" for students who will go into full time practice. They add to the cumulative reputation of the Medical School and they are critical to the smooth operation of the institution. They may be at the highest levels of the "C" in the tripartite mission - but they will never be at the Associate or Full Professor level for "E" or for research/scholarship because they will not obtain that which they do not seek - a sufficient level of impactful scholarship. Some faculty who were hired on the CE track discover during their undifferentiated time or even later that they not only love clinical medicine with some teaching but that they wish to do this to the exclusion of scholarship, even with the broadening of the definition of CE scholarship. They then find themselves "frozen" at the Assistant Professor level. Although this is acceptable culture in some few academic medical centers, it has not been so in New Haven and hence results in dissatisfaction on the part of some of these faculty. This in turn may make retention of these important faculty challenging and may make it more difficult to recruit new faculty who may see this as a sign of "disrespect" for clinical work by the institution.
One approach to this issue would be to create "alternate kudos". Some academic hospitals or institutes have designations such as "Assistant Physician", "Associate Physician", "Senior Physician" which are separate from the academic titles. This does not, however, fit easily into the Yale Academic Medical Center model. Hence, an alternate approach for Yale, which is also used at a number of other "peer institutions", is to create a true "Clinical" track which would be a ladder faculty track for those faculty emphasizing clinical work, possibly some teaching beyond that of "role models" (but not necessarily), but not requiring any engagement in substantive scholarship, even in its broadest definition. Since this phenotype faculty wish to be engaged in essentially only one of the three missions of the School, this track would need to have different academic titles associated with it, specifically, it would need to include the concept (and likely the verbiage) of "Clinical" in the title to emphasize that these faculty are hired primarily to
---
contribute to the life of the medical school through the clinical mission with much lesser contribution to the teaching mission and little contribution to the scholarship mission. The titles could either co-opt the "voluntary track" titles for these "C" phenotype full time faculty who excel at clinical work (for example, "Assistant Clinical Professor of Surgery"), or, the titles could be other variants such as "Assistant Professor of Clinical Surgery") but the title would not be "Assistant Professor of Surgery". Thus the title of "Clinical Professor" (or a variant) would then no longer reflect who employs the individual (as it currently does for the voluntary track) but instead would recognize the faculty member as being at the level of a Professor in terms of clinical work and would also reflect the fact that such an individual can be a superb role model of the art of clinical medicine in their field of specialization - not necessarily an educational innovator, not necessarily advancing scholarship and pushing the field dramatically forward but recognizing the individual as a true Master Clinician. Advancement along the ladder on this "C" track would not, of course, be determined by "length of service" nor is it a track for "failed CE" but instead would have to reflect accomplishment and reputation. However, accomplishment, impact, and reputation would be dependent nearly solely on "C" accomplishment and reputation, not other aspects of the tripartite mission.
This approach would also abrogate what has become the confusing misnomer of granting "voluntary track" appointments to our full-time faculty in the "Clinician" employment category who do not fit any of the other ladder tracks and hence are given an additional "voluntary track" title if they teach. Individuals on this "Clinical" rank would, instead, be full time ladder track faculty. Concomitant with the creation of a new Clinical Track would be the elimination of the "Clinician" faculty employment category.
Finally, the creation of a new "Clinical" Track would further make even clearer that the CE Track faculty are engaged in more than just the clinical and teaching missions and, given those additional responsibilities and the critical difference in how they are evaluated for promotion, require a different total "effort distribution" compared to Clinical Track faculty. There is a presumption that "C" Track faculty would devote more time to "standard" clinical work than those on the CE Track, albeit the total contribution to the clinical mission by CE Track faculty, including not only "standard" clinical work but also program development, quality improvement, teaching at the national level, and so forth, might be comparable. This would encourage Departments to perhaps more realistically assess the possible needs of the CE Track faculty for their scholarship and career development. The Committee recognized that there might be significant variation among the disciplines of medicine as to how such differences in effort between CE and C Track faculty are incorporated into the clinical mission of different departments.
The Committee felt that this latter approach - creation of a "C" ladder track - was the preferred approach to deal with these very valuable faculty members who do not fit the criteria for advancement on the CE Track. Faculty on this track, even at the level of Clinical Professor, would likely have an appointment that is short of a "continuing appointment" that is now given to CE and CS track faculty. Further details regarding the nature of the University commitment at the higher ranks was recommended to be left to a followup process that would refine the concept of the Clinical Track.
It should be noted that new faculty might be hired directly into this track rather than into an "undifferentiated" situation. Alternatively, faculty who start "undifferentiated" would be able to choose this track based on how their career interests are progressing.
It would be important to also provide for track switches as appropriate between C and CE tracks, again to provide for faculty whose career goals and interests evolve over time. Given the
---
different nature of the C and CE tracks and the difference in "continuing appointment" status, there should not be any counterproductive incentives for those who want to pursue the scholarship mission to "take the easier route". Indeed, if anything, the minimum requirement for clinical excellence would be higher on the C track than on the CE or CS tracks since this would represent nearly $100 \%$ of the faculty member's effort. If this new track were to be put into place, it would also be appropriate to have an "open enrollment / open switch" period of time for existing faculty at the Assistant or Associate level to freely choose to switch to this new track when it was created.
Under this proposed scenario, as noted, the "Clinician" faculty designation would be eliminated. This employment category has been atypical from the start and has been seen by some faculty as mildly pejorative. Options for those faculty who currently would be appointed as Clinician without any voluntary rank title would include: (a) appointment as a Clinical Instructor with this title permitted in perpetuity, (b) appointment initially as a de novo Assistant Clinical Professor (or whatever the appropriate terminology was decided to be), that is, not undifferentiated but already differentiated, with the idea that this group would not advance beyond the Assistant Clinical Professor rank.
For the faculty who are currently (and in the future) truly "voluntary", that is, not paid by Yale but engaged in a significant fashion with the life of the medical school, there would need to be a concomitant review of titles and promotion criteria. Although it may be relatively rare for such non-full-time (true voluntary) faculty to attain the ranks of Associate Clinical Professor or Clinical Professor, those rare individuals who have demonstrable clinical achievements equal to the requirements for the full-time faculty could be advanced to higher ranks.
The designation of a new track, or the "co-opting" of the voluntary track for new purposes, is obviously a complex issue and one that will require extensive considerations beyond the purview of this Committee. Indeed, the final decision as to whether or not such a track should be created and the details of the track and its relationship to the voluntary tracks, if it were to occur, is similarly beyond the charge of this Committee. Moreover, further consideration of this would significantly delay the Committee's needed report on the many other aspects of the CE Track. Hence the Committee felt that it would instead be appropriate to make a recommendation that the School seriously consider creation of a "Clinical Track" ladder faculty pathway but not make a firm recommendation one way or the other. The Committee leaves to the leadership determination of the best process for accomplishing consideration of such a track.
In summary, the Committee believes that the School should undertake a process to comprehensively consider the replacement of the Clinician employment category with a "Clinical" ladder track faculty pathway. Recognizing the complexity of such an undertaking, as well as the need to place these considerations within the context of strategic planning for the School, the Committee does not endorse any particulars about either the process or the outcome, but does believe that it is timely to begin such a consideration process.
11. The Committee believes that the School should utilize the same process that is developed to examine the wisdom of adding a Clinical ladder track in considering whether there should be term limits at the level of Assistant Professor for the CE track, similar to those for other tracks at the School but likely less time restrictive overall by comparison. In the context of discussions examining ways that Departments might be further
---
motivated to better support and recognize scholarship in the CE Track, and ways that CE Faculty may be encouraged to more clearly focus on the tripartite mission that they embrace, the Committee began discussions regarding the possibility of establishing time limits on CE track faculty at the level of Assistant Professor, similar to term limits for faculty entering CS, Investigator and Tenure tracks, albeit the number of terms permitted at the level of Assistant Professor might be greater. Limiting the time at which a CE track faculty member could remain an Assistant Professor would force both the faculty member and the Department to work together toward promotion in a more explicit manner, thus advantaging both the faculty member and the department. The effort distribution of CE faculty may then have a greater likelihood of being explicitly different from that for "Clinician" faculty (or faculty on a new Clinical Track as described above) in order to protect their time for achieving impactful scholarship within the fixed time period. Similarly, both the faculty member and the Department would be incentivized to assess progress frequently and realistically, and to carefully consider resources required for success.
If, at the end of this time limit at the Assistant Professor level, the faculty member was not achieving goals for promotion on the CE track but had proven themselves to be a superb clinician with potential for advancement on the "Clinical" track, then they could be switched to and the "C" (Clinical) track at the appropriate rank. (As noted above, the Committee envisioned that C track faculty would have no time limits at any rank.) Also, as noted earlier, the Committee was envisioning any Assistant Professor time limits as being significantly more generous than that for CS or TT faculty.
The Committee noted that the CS Track does not currently have any time limits at the Associate Professor rank (nor for that matter does the traditional track once the faculty member has attained the rank of Associate Professor without term). Therefore, the Committee felt that the issue of time limits on the CE Track should be considered only at the Assistant Professor level.
One exception to the potential imposition of time limits for CE track Assistant Professor that the Committee felt would be appropriate would be to have current CE Track Assistant Professor faculty exempt from such limits and be able to retain the option of remaining at that rank indefinitely. Because these faculty were hired under a "no limit" policy, which reflects what was envisioned at the time the CE track was originally created, enforcing a limit for this group would potentially be unfair. The Committee felt that the desire of these loyal and productive faculty members to stay at this rank should therefore be respected.
The Committee believed that the question of time limits on the CE Track at the Assistant Professor level (and the nature of those time limits as compared to the CS and other Tracks) was a question that had sufficiently profound implications at both the School and the University level, that a final decision would require further consultation with Faculty, Chairs, School Leadership, and the University Provost's office. Moreover, the Committee opined that the decision to impose time limits at the Assistant Professor level for the CE Track was, to a large extent, also dependent on the determination by the School as to the wisdom of creating a Clinical ladder track and, if such a track were indeed created, the details of that alternate ladder pathway. Because of these considerations, the Committee believed that it was not possible for it to endorse any particular answer to the question of possible Assistant Professor term limits, but that this would be better left as a component of the process that would address the question of creating a Clinical Track.
In summary, the Committee believes that the School should utilize the same process that is developed to examine the wisdom of adding a Clinical ladder track in considering whether there should be term limits at the level of Assistant Professor for the CE track,
---
similar to those for other tracks at the School but likely less time restrictive overall by comparison.
12. The Committee leaves to the current established University processes any changes in the Faculty Handbook that would be needed after its findings and recommendations have been reviewed. The Committee considered a variety of other potential changes to the CE Track and explicitly felt that these were not appropriate to implement at the current time. Potential changes considered and rejected include: (a) reestablishing an upper limit on the number of CE Track faculty that could be allowed in the School; (b) changing the current absolute requirement for referee letters for promotion in this track; (c) altering the current use and meaning of the "coterminous" designations.
In addition, the Committee recognized that some of the findings above and recommendations below might require changes in the language in the Faculty Handbook. However, the Committee felt that this was not per se within its scope to wordsmith such language. The Committee felt that articulating principles and recommendations was its primary role and that any changes to the faculty handbook should occur through the current regular processes, after the administration evaluates the findings and recommendations and decides which are worthy of implementation.
In summary, the Committee considered a variety of other options concerning alterations to the CE Track that were either brought to its attention or arose in discussions but did not endorse any of these alternatives at this time. The Committee leaves to the current established University processes any changes in the Faculty Handbook that would be needed after its findings and recommendations have been reviewed.
---
# Recommendations of the Committee: 
1. The Committee recommends that the criteria for promotion in the CE Track remain the same and parallel the level of accomplishment expected for all of the current full-time ladder tracks. Specifically, elevation to Professor should remain contingent upon national (+/-international) recognition of the significant impact that the individual has had on the field. Elevation to Associate Professor requires an emerging national recognition of the candidate's impact as well as a firm regional recognition of that impact.
2. The Committee recommends that the breadth of CE Track scholarship be better defined so as to be inclusive of the many ways in which these faculty advance the practice of Medicine. The Committee therefore recommends further updating and modification of the excellent guidelines on CE Track scholarship that were produced by another ad hoc committee in 2012. Broadly, these recognize the breadth of CE scholarship possibilities (both clinical and educational) along with metrics to assess the impact of CE scholarship. They describe documentation of scholarly impactful activities that go beyond the traditional hardcopy journal publication models. The specific recommended metrics and guidelines are outlined in detail in Appendix 4. The Committee also recommends that the School promulgate these criteria to all faculty, departments, chairs, Appointments \& Promotions (A\&P) committees, and to outside referees evaluating the faculty for promotion.
As part of the recognition of the breadth of CE scholarship and dissemination of the information, the Committee recommends changes to the CV Supplement and to the Template Letters sent to referees during evaluation for promotion so as to better reflect the principles outlined in this report. This includes a more detailed explanation to the referees of what Yale regards as the breadth and metrics of CE Scholarship by the inclusion of the "guidelines" document alluded to above. The specific recommendations are delineated in Appendix 5.
3. Faculty hired with the anticipation of being on the CE Track must have a rigorous CEappropriate mentoring plan in place. While it may be desirable for all faculty transitioning from their first Assistant Professor appointment to their second such term to receive a formal written evaluation (possibly by the Department A\&P Committee) of their progress regarding future promotion, the Committee felt that this was especially important for CE Track faculty, given the conflicting demands on their time. This document should include evaluation of quality/impact in all three missions and not just concern itself with issues of productivity. Faculty should be reviewing and updating both their CV and CV Supplement on a yearly basis and should be asked to consider who they might recommend as external (and internal) referees in anticipation of the time when this will be needed for consideration of promotion. The Committee also recommends that the School engage in a process by which the Faculty office would work mutually with Departments to define "best practices" in CE mentoring, define minimal standards, and, if needed, consider providing ongoing central mechanisms to help Departments mentor CE Track faculty.
4. The Committee recommends that the School establish a process to carry out a directed assessment by a working group of (a) what infrastructure is needed for success on the CE Track (cores, administrative support, informatics support, and so forth), (b) the state of such infrastructure currently at the School ("gap assessment"), and (c) a plan to enhance such infrastructure if enhancement is needed. This would include not only a review of YCCI offerings but an assessment across all campuses.
---
5. The Committee recommends a number of changes to the current promotion rubric for CE Track faculty to better incorporate recognition of the breadth of scholarship and the various metrics for promotion evaluation. The following clarifications to the required referee letters for promotion on the CE track should be made: For large departments, Yale non-arm's length referee status should be extended to individuals in other sections of the department, as well as to individuals from other departments (that is, it is acceptable in large departments for such letters to come from the same department but different sections). Arm's length letters are defined as coming from individuals who are not at Yale and who have no conflict that would require them to recuse themselves from review (similar to requirements for NIH study sections). Although this traditionally has excluded all individuals who have ever published with the candidate, in the case of publications of clinical guidelines, consensus conferences, national educational curricula and similar publications whose purpose is to bring together experts in a particular area, co-authorship on such publications does not exclude an individual from being an arm's length referee (this is also the approach used by NIH). Similarly, an individual who may have referred patients to a particular candidate or participated in a national educational forum can be an arm's length referee provided s/he does not have any specific other conflict of interest (e.g., joint grant, prior mentor relationship, joint clinical practice). These recommended changes are further described in Appendix 6.
The Committee also recommends that a number of changes be considered to the processes of the School A\&P Committee. These are designed to provide a smoother and more comprehensive process appropriate to all tracks, but especially to the CE track. These recommendations are also included in more detail in Appendix 6.
6. The Committee recommends the retention of current policies regarding track switches at the level of Assistant and Associate Professor and also emphasizes that the CE Track is never a "fall-back" track for CS Track faculty.
7. The Committee recommends that the School allow track changes at the Full Professor level between CE and CS, although the Committee also cautions that such changes should be extremely rare and based on relatively infrequent institutional events. Such rare track transfers could be justified on the basis of a substantive institutional event occurring after the appointment to full professor which might have altered the original appointment track had this event occurred prior to the individual's appointment to Professor; examples might include substantive changes in the Faculty Handbook regarding the tracks, creation of new tracks, or creation of a new Department. Such track change requests at the Full Professor level should not be based solely on career-direction evolution that might occur after the Professorial appointment, nor should they be based on other more minor retrospective concerns that instead should have been raised at the time of the initial appointment. The Committee does not recommend any particular procedure for dealing with these rare events but instead defers to the leadership for further definition of policy/procedure.
8. The Committee recommends that the School explore creative options to allow full or possibly partial triennial or sabbatical leaves that might be more compatible with the work-style of CE Track faculty. Leave, of course, remains a privilege and not a right. The Committee also noted that there is some confusion among faculty as to the "rules" for a variety of benefits, especially for coterminous faculty, and recommends dissemination of clear guidelines regarding these human resources issues.
9. The Committee recommends that Departments and the School continuously monitor the blend of CE Track faculty, Clinicians, and CS and TT Track faculty appropriate to the tripartite mission of the Department and the School. (In these recommendations, "Clinicians" refers to
---
either the current faculty structure or to the "Clinical Track" that is proposed above and below for further consideration.) To accomplish this, and to optimize mentoring, the Committee recommends that all faculty be given a "most likely" or "anticipated" Track designation at the time of hire and that this designation is communicated to the faculty member and to the School leadership. The Committee recognizes that first term Assistant Professors are formally "undifferentiated." The Committee does not intend by this recommendation to suggest that the current "fluidity" that is allowed during the early part of one's career be unnecessarily administrated restricted. The Committee therefore leaves to the leadership determination of the best way to implement this recommendation.
The Committee also recommends consideration of standardization of "hire" letters and that such letters include details of clinical and educational responsibilities as well as expectations for scholarship. Departments should also make clear to faculty the promotion process through the rank of Professor at the time of hire and should be clear with respect to the meaning of a coterminous appointment where this is included. While the Committee strongly encourages careful consideration by Departments and the School to provide resources to CE Track faculty that will aid their tripartite duties, the Committee does not proscribe any particular resources that should be devoted to assist the academic progress of CE Track faculty. However, if the individual being recruited is to receive any additional support for scholarship, this too should be outlined in the initial recruitment letter.
10. The Committee recommends that the School give careful consideration to the abandonment of the "Clinician" employment category and to the creation instead of a new fulltime ladder Clinical ("C") track that would have different verbiage for the titles of the three ranks to reflect the concept that scholarship would not be part of the criteria for advancement on this new track. Nevertheless, documented excellence in clinical activities, often including some clinical education, would be rigorous and essential for advancement up the ranks. Although the Committee opined on a variety of issues involved in such consideration (see above), it neither wanted to delay this report nor did it feel it had the expertise to fully consider all the issues. Therefore, the Committee simply recommends that the School develop a process to consider whether it should engage in creation of a new Clinical Track and, if so, what the details would be regarding such a track (including issues of track switching, criteria for promotion, relationship to the current voluntary tracks).
11. The Committee recommends that the School utilize the same mechanism it develops for the recommendation above to simultaneously give consideration to whether there should be term limits at the level of Assistant Professor for the CE Track. Again, the Committee recognized the complexities of the pros and cons of term limits and also recognized that a decision on this matter would likely be influenced by the final decision as to whether or not to create a new Clinical Track. For those reasons, the Committee simply recommends that the School develop a process to consider this issue. The Committee does not recommend term limits at the level of Associate Professor for the CE Track.
12. The Committee recommends that changes be made to the verbiage in the Faculty Handbook to reflect the principles outlined in this report. The Committee recognizes that changing language in the Faculty Handbook is a complex process that potentially affects other parts of the University. Hence the Committee itself does not suggest the particular changes to be made but instead suggests that the School administration, in conjunction with the Provost's Office, reviews the language in accordance with the findings and recommendations in this report.